Title: Workflow Using Git
Date: 2021-03-25
Modified: 2021-04-10 14:28
Category: Workflow
Tags: git, workflow
Summary: How I use Git.

My goal of this post is to help someone get started with Git by sharing some
useful resources and talking about my workflow.

Source control is not just for programmers.
For example, writers source control can be extremely useful by working on a 
novel and can try different versions of a story line without need version1.doc,
good_version.doc, bear.doc, etc.
Instead you can have a main branch of your story and create a separate branch
to try out a different story line or try a concept and can also go back to a
previous version/commit without losing anything.
For example [Standard Ebooks](https://standardebooks.org/) use GitHub.

## Resources

First of all I have found these books very useful in getting up to speed with
Git.

- [Git in the Trenches](https://cbx33.github.io/gitt/)

- [Pro Git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2)

If you don't know much of Git, Git in the Trenches is a pretty good start as it
is not very long and is actually a good read.
Peter Savage created a fictional company using proper source control for the
first time as a way to introduce git.

Pro Git goes through more of the details and is a great reference.

## My Workflow

I will go through my workflow for work and personal projects.
The focus is on the Git portion.
I plan on doing separate posts describing the other tools, thought process and
so on.

### Data Analysis

I will go through how I use Jupyter Notebooks, Cookiecutter, etc. later and
will focus on Git for now.
I use [Git Flow](https://github.com/petervanderdoes/gitflow-avh) which is based
on an article from
[Vincent Driessen](https://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/).
You don't need Git Flow to use this model.
I have `master` and `develop` branches.
The `master` branch only has my releases where I shared information with my
team.
The `develop` branch is where I do most of my work and I may have `feature`
branches where I am trying out a concept or working on a specific problem.
My releases I just use a simple timestamp tag with maybe a key phrase to help
me search if I need to go back.

My main plan is to keep it simple since my data analysis projects I typically
short lived.
I mainly want to keep track of what I am working on and be able to replicate
my results.

However I don't commit any data.
I also don't commit Jupyter Notebook files (ipynb).
I create percent scripts (py) which I commit.

I do create a `README.md` so that I can replicate my analysis.

	Using .gitignore makes it easy to not commit items you don't want to.

### Programming Projects

Very similar to my Data Analysis but I do some additional things.
I start with the same branches and I also use `feature` branches.
However I also use `bugfix` branches for problems that come up that I want to
branch off of `master` instead of `develop` because it is to fix a critical
bug and I don't want to introduce new features at that time.

	Note it seems to be a bug in Git Flow which bugfix merges to develop
	instead of merging to master.
	I would do bugfix branches manually.

I use xx.xx.xx for my releases and I go through and describe features and
changes.
I also provide at least a `README.md` but I usually include much more
documentation.
There is a `CHANGELOG.md` so that it is not required to have git access to
know all the changes.

### Documentation Projects

Creating manuals, my resume, this website, etc. I also use git.
It is similar to how I do my Data Analysis but simpler in some ways.
I use the branches in a similar way.
My release also typically more of the timestamp for things like my resume but
I use xx.xx.xx release for manuals, reports and the like.

I try to avoid using something like MS Word or
[Libreoffice](https://www.libreoffice.org/) and use either
[Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) or 
[RestructuredText](https://docutils.sourceforge.io/rst.html).
RestructuredText I tend to use 
[Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/index.html) which can create
wonderful web pages and pdfs.

For example with my resume I can have a base resume that includes everything.
Then I can create a branch that is focused for a particular job or a branch
where I reformat my resume to focus a particular industry, skillset, so on.

## Git Alias

Below are the contents from my `.gitconfig` file.

	[user]                                                                                                                                                
	        email = christopher@tyler.com                                                                                                         
        	name = Christopher Tyler                                                                                                                      
	[core]                                                                                                                                                
	        editor = micro                                                                                                                                
	[alias]                                                                                                                                               
	        st = status --short -uno                                                                                                                      
	        ci = commit                                                                                                                                   
	        ca = commit --amend                                                                                                                           
        	caa = commit -a --amend                                                                                                                       
        	br = branch                                                                                                                                   
        	co = checkout                                                                                                                                 
        	df = diff                                                                                                                                     
        	lg = log -p --pretty=fuller --abbrev-commit                                                                                                   
        	lgg = log --pretty=fuller --abbrev-commit --stat                                                                                              
        	up = pull --rebase                                                                                                                            
        	over = log --pretty=format:'%h: %an at %ad %n%b' --abbrev-commit --grep='Overview'                                                            

I have been adding as I realize I keep using the same command over and over.
`over` is what I use to create my `CHANGELOG.md` as all my release tags include
an Overview title.

	Note that email is not my actual email.
	Also for the editor in Windows for example you need to use the full path.

To make it easier since I use multiple machines, I keep my `.gitconfig` file in
a Git Repository with my other config files so that I can keep everything up to
date.

## GitHub/GitLab/Gitea

Git does not require using an online server but it can be very useful to work
with others and share repositories.
It can also be useful for projects that you are the sole contributor as it
makes it easy to share things between work and home for example.

[GitHub](https://github.com/) is probably the most popular.
I use it for this website and any projects that I don't mind sharing publicly.
In the past prior to Microsoft's acquisition you were limited on the number of
private repositories but wow I don't believe there is a limitation.

[GitLab](https://about.gitlab.com/) is another popular online server.
I use it for all my private repositories.

Finally I use [Gitea](https://gitea.io/en-us/) in a Docker container.
I have one at work for all my work projects and one at home for my personal
projects.
In theory you can also self host GitLab but it has some hefty hardware
requirements.
Gitea Docker container was easy to setup and run.

Beyond just using them as a remote Git server, I use it to track issues,
milestones and project tracking.
Gitea for example you can include a wiki to put information about a particular
project.

## Summary

Post is a little long but Git is a great tool.
At work we use [SVN](https://subversion.apache.org/) and while any source control is better
than no source control, I greatly prefer Git.
I usually use Git and only put my releases in SVN.

Also if you are on Windows, consider using
[Tortoise Git](https://tortoisegit.org/).
I try to do as much of my work as possible either in a Ubuntu virtual machine
and Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) before I do anything on Windows
proper.

Hope this post helps get you started with Git.